The Origin of Patriarchy and Warfare in the Neolithic
Introductory remark by Horst Tran
The following chapter VIII from the book “The Invention of the Gods” by Gerhard Bott was translated by me from German with kind permission of the author.
The original chapter title is “The Four Modes of the Neolithic” (Die vier Modi
des Neolithikums).
The essay deals with four developmental phases in the Neolithic which the author calls "Modes I-IV", thus introducing a yet unknown but necessary and helpful differentation into the scientific reflections on the Neolithic. Mode I, starting
around 10,000 BCE, consists in the establishment of two most important cultural
innovations: agriculture (the first appearance of producing economy) and sedentariness. Mode II, up from 8,900 BCE, additionally comprises the domestication
of small hoof-animals (sheep and goats) by the female labor-collective. In this
context occurs a discovery of extreme significance: The interrelation of sexuality
and pregnancy is realized. In Mode III, starting around 7,000 BCE, the male
labor-collective succeeds in domesticating bovids as herd animals what opens
the door for the stepwise proceeding hierarchization of society, the social downgrading of women, and the concomitant ´Invention of the Gods´. Mode IV, up
from 4,000 BCE, is characterized by the domestication of equids (horses and
donkeys), what facilitates a yet unknown militarization of society.

The Neolithic or Neolithic Revolution is, in the first place, the economic revolution with regard to the transition from the appropriating economic system of
the Paleolithic gatherer-hunters to a producing economic system which started
around 10,000 BCE and was interconnected with sedentariness.
1.1. The transitions were gradual and fluid even in the regions where the Neolithic began. Of course it was not possible to produce from the beginning so

much food that any appropriation was unnecessary, but the more the produced
food contributed to nourishment, the more the contribution of appropriated food
went down, as archeological findings show.
1.2. A frequent error is to assume that the Neolithic is synonymous with "farmers
and animal husbandry", since the Neolithic began more modestly with female
planters who were the first to start with food production. Already around 15,000
BCE Paleolithic women had collected wild cereals and there were querns
already around 13,000 BCE on which the gathered wild cereals had been
ground. At the time of this Paleolithic gatherer-hunter-system the gathering women already had unearthed corms and tubers with their digging-sticks. Therefore, it is logical that the women, the experts of the vegetation, proceeded from
appropriation to production by sowing gathered wild cereals around 10,000 BCE
for the first time, as well as growing legumes and tubers, and thus prosecuted a
purposeful planting and for that purpose required working the soil and transforming their old digging-stick into a hoe. Hoe-farming was the beginning of agriculture. Female working communities are the inventors of the horticulture, the
“planters-economy” in terms of the social sciences. Gradually a purposeful selection of the seeds and, thus, plant breeding is learned and taught.
1.3. Already in the Paleolithic, the collective of male hunters had learned the advantages of artful hunting: They did eventually not thoughtlessly kill every
animal, but selected their bag sparing young animals and, because of their reproductive capacity, female animals. Still in later times, after animal husbandry had
been achieved, only male animals were eaten and sacrificed. Among women as
well among men a more and more planning and economic thinking prepares the
epochal transition to the Neolithic.
1.4. The beginnings of a Neolithic economic practice are characterized by a purposeful cultivation of plants. It is evident that the agriculture, initiated by female
planters, requests staying near the fields or even the transition to permanent
sedentariness, though, initially, settlement may still have taken place with tents
until the soil turned out to be so fertile that the construction of clay huts made
sense. The Paleolithic ends, according to scientific definitions, with the first appearance of a Neolithic, that is to say, productive economic system, and that was
firstly invented by humans in the Anatolian-Syrian region and in the "Fertile

Crescent" around 10,500 BCE as has been shown by archeological findings.
After these pioneers had started with the described early agriculture (or horticulture) communities which, after this economic revolution, that is, after 10,000
BCE, totally continued the ancient appropriating system, are termed as Epi-Paleolithic. This term circumscribes all co-operatives which, after the Neolithic
economy was invented elsewhere, continue the old economic system without
any production. Such post-Paleolithic groups are sometimes also called "Mesolithic" as we saw before in the case of K.J. Narr. This term should not be used
because it semantically suggests that the Mesolithic was a period between the
Paleolithic and the Neolithic. This is incorrect: The so-called “Mesolithic” does
not begin before the Neolithic but at the same time. Since this synchronicity is
often misjudged, the term has frequently led to the utmost confusion of facts.
1.5. Wrong is that the first fixed sanctuaries only appeared in the Neolithic. Fixed
sanctuaries were established by the Paleolithic co-operatives already in the
Aurignacién 40,000 years ago by painting their cult caves and for the adoration the
"Great Mother", as many sacral sculptures of the gatherer-hunters show us.

Note: The innovation of the Neolithic had nothing to do with the installation of
sedentary sanctuaries as some people claim for Göbekli Tepe in Anatolia. New is
only the human construction of sanctuaries. Even so, there were still in the
Neolithic, as previously in the Paleolithic, places of worship in the open air, often on mountains or in groves.
The mentioned “Great Mother”, imagined as mother of all life, was fancied as
the "Grand-Mother of Animals", as well. The later term “Mistress of Animals” or
“Lady of Animals” should be avoided for Paleolithic times because it evokes,
like the term “LORD”, a hierarchical connotation and therefore should be used
only to describe the perception of adorers living in later Neolithic times, because
in the Paleolithic hierarchy was nonexistent.
2. In order to avoid incorrect or confusing arguments and statements about the
Neolithic, a precise differentiation of the four modes (“4 modi”), which I am introducing in order to promote clearness and a deeper understanding, is indispensable.
Too often it is the case that the Neolithic is regarded and dealt with as an undifferentiated historical entity or is just distinguished by pottery styles.

Yet the differences between the 4 modes, which I am going to sketch in the following, are far bigger than those between the four modes of the Paleolithic tool
culture as they are commonly accepted to-day. (Olduvai, Acheuléen, Moustérien,
Aurignacién). Since the historical chronology of the 4 modes of the Neolithic can,
due to its specific economic characteristics, be dated rather exactly, it helps us to
connect social changes with the respective mode under historical and con-ceptual
aspects, that is to say, it enables us to socio-historically recognize and understand
them. Without such an understanding most rites, to which the memory traces in the
oldest myths still bear witness, remain unexplainable, such as the ram cult, the bull
cult, the bovid sacrifices, and the subsequent "Great Horse Sacrifice" in the equid
cultures, such as the Aryan culture. The clarifica-tion of the mythic dark helps us to
understand the revolutionary cultural change, which was, after almost 200,000
years of an appropriating economy, connected with the economic revolution of
production, and to understand the concomitant change in human consciousness. It
is obvious that this individual development of consciousness is a dialectic process:
On the one hand Being determines con-sciousness, on the other hand consciousness
determines Being.

3. The Four Modes:
Mode I: 10,500 BCE Agriculture and Sedentariness
A producing economy begins with the elementary agriculture of the early female
planters. The work necessary to prepare the soil and the attempts of cultivation
are naturally a task of the female communities, accomplished by continuing the
previous work of the plant gathering, as was usual in the Paleolithic, and extended now by progressing to collective hoe-farming. The cultivation and breeding
of plants was women´s business, not a job of the males, who continued hunting.
Planting legumes and tubers and experiments with the seeds of gathered wild
cereals, is, of course, connected with permanent sedentariness whether in constructed clay huts or still in the tents of the past. In Mode I the gender-specific
division of labor is maintained, as was usual in Paleolithic times. While the female labor community engages in the cultivation of soil and in the care and control of fields and harvest, the male hunter collective continues to hunt as in the
Paleolithic, yet starting from a fixed dwelling.

Note: The Neolithic begins with vegetal production complemented by the previous appropriation, the latter now with emphasis on hunting.
Examples for this cultural mode are evident in Wadi-en-Natuf and the Zarzien
culture in the Zagros mountains around 9,000 BCE, moreover in Tell
Abuhureyra in Northern Syria, in several settlements in the Natufien culture, as
well as in Catal Hüyük in Anatolia, already populated since 10,000 BCE.
The economy in Göbekli Tepe in Anatolia, starting around 9,000 BCE, is clearly
a Neolithic culture since the cultivation of cereal is proved and, furthermore, the
building of places of worship out of stone indicates sedentariness. For 95 % of
the Tepe are not excavated yet, it remains uncertain whether there were constructed houses as it was the case in the nearby Catal Hüyük thousand years later
which, around 7,250 BCE, housed 7,000 inhabitants, thus being the largest town
of this era. It is possible that the builders of Göbekli Tepe sanctuary kept on living in their tents nearby.
Even if the age determination of Göbekli Tepe will undoubtedly be affirmed to
around 9,000/8,000 BCE, it is a sanctuary built in Neolithic times. Thus it is scientifically wrong to talk about "Paleolithic hunter-gatherers", as Schmidt does;
we are dealing here, in scientifically correct terms, with Neolithic populations
because of the proved cultivation of cereals. Not even "epi-Paleolithic" or
"Mesolithic" are correct terms for this early agriculture community capable of
such building activities; for we are dealing here, in scientifically correct terms,
with Neolithic because of the proved cultivation of cereals. The labeling of the
builders as "Paleolithic hunter-gatherers" by archeologist and excavator K.
Schmidt reveals a lack of sociological and historical knowledge. The persistence
of gradual gathering-hunting appropriation had been usual in every early
Neolithic social organization, as has been proved; yet this fact does not make
such an early Neolithic social organization a Paleolithic one, in terms of
scientific language.
As long as the excavations are not completed and the time designations not irrefutably affirmed, I will question whether these cultic buildings, presupposing according to Schmidt a considerable social division of work and hierarchy, had
really been constructed already around 9,000 BCE.

Mode II: 8,900 - 7,000 BCE Early Farming with Domestic Animals
a) The female labor communities improve the initial hoe-farming by inventing
the draw-hoe, the precursor of the plough, thus achieving an intensification of
agriculture, especially for the cultivation of cereals.
The knowledge of seed-breeding increases. An essential innovation is the domestication of sheep and goats as “domestic animals” in the literal meaning.
This stock rearing began partly by self-domestication of the mentioned small
hoof-animals and partly by the female labor-collective who, contrary to the continuously hunting men, remain by the houses and farming areas and are jointly
able to control these small animals. This domestication begins in Anatolia and in
the Zagros mountains.
Important: There is not yet any herding of sheep. The aggregation of these domesticated animals into large herds is a secondary cultural technique which was
later copied from the domesticated cattle herds, and therefore occurs in Mode III
at the earliest.
b) The males continue to hunt, as I said, also in Mode II, namely gazelles in the
Near East, as the archeological record, i.e. in Tell Abuhureyra, shows. The decrease of bone findings of hunted animals in relation to the bones of domesticated sheep and/or goats happens very slowly. It takes many centuries until the
share of the bones of domesticated animals in relation to the bones of bag
exceeds a modest 10 %.
It is evident that only after a significant reduction of hunting the males were able
to devote time to attending the domesticated animals.
By the way: At this time around 8,000 BCE Jericho is one of the rare fortified
settlements. It has some hundred inhabitants, and there are already fully cultivated cereals.
c) Mode II remains a PPN (pre-pottery) cultural stage. However, it is of great
importance that we here encounter the first and oldest artifacts proving a sanctification of sexuality: The sacral sculpture showing a coitus of a human pair
around 8,000 BCE. (See chapter IX).
Due to these economic facts we find evidence for a ram cult which left cultural
marks around 7,250 BCE in Catal Hüyük, even though the bull cult is, at that
time, already prominent. Generally, at this time, the grain store begins to be

transformed into a temple. The crook is the instrument of the shepherd, the herder of sheep and goats, used in order to catch the animals by the legs and control
them, and still today the crook remains a ceremonial object of priests. We shall
encounter the crook later also as a distinguishing mark of the sovereign, what is
a telltale sign.
Mode III: 7,000 - 4,000 BCE Peasants and Cattle Breeders
This mode is hallmarked by a considerable production progress, which will
really change the world: The domestication of cattle, bovids, achieved with the
aurochs in Anatolia. The main difference from both preceding modes is the domestication of cattle as herd animals by the male collective, which only during
this mode definitively evolved from hunters to herdsmen. Like in Mode I the
women had initiated the Neolithic by passing on from gathering appropriation to
production by hoe-farming, by now improved to intensive agriculture, the males
only now become real Neolithic producers by domesticating cattle, bovid animals aggregated by nature in herds.
During Mode III small settlements grow to become the first genuine towns, and
the first social division of labor takes place, substituting step by step the previous and archaic gender-specific division of labor. This is, as well, the beginning
of the ceramic Neolithic (PN), and with the kiln, as found in Catal Hüyük, also
the first simple metallurgy, i.e., copper as pearl jewels emerges. As yet these
urban settlements are not fortified in the beginning, there is no archeological
record of violence, and at this time storehouses are enhanced to sacral buildings
and "temples". We can and should divide this history-charged Mode III into
three phases:
Phase 1: The Beginnings
Already the initial phase of the bovid culture is characterized by the bull cult,
the main feature of the later Sacred Marriage Rite.(see chapter X). The first records are dated at 7,250 BCE in Catal Hüyük, at that time the largest urban settlement on Earth. The bull cult now complements the Paleolithic cult of the
Great Mother. Nonetheless Catal Hüyük shows that this early social organization remains matrilinear and matrilocal: The funeral- and ancestor-cult demonstrate matrilinearity and matrilocality, the houses belong to the women, who
dwell in them. (see chapter VII/8).

This allows us to assume a matrifocal social organization. It is not surprising
therefore that despite of a sacred sculpture allegorizing a coitus of a human pair,
80 % of the excavated sculptures are female and only 20 % male. (Mellaart loc.
cit. p. 202 f.)
Since the bull cult is always a symbol of male fertility and leads to the celebration of fatherhood in the Sacred Marriage, we stand here at the gateway of forthcoming patrilinearity although this, evidently, does not yet lead to the establishment of the patrilocality of exogamy.
The bovid culture is, initially, characterized by the “gentle herdsman”; especially in the beginning there is no evidence of a hierarchy, but there is evidence
of hierarchy`s predecessor: the beginning of a social division of labor and of
skilled crafts. This is a social quantum leap, too. In addition to the previous
gender-specific and collective division of labor now there is an archeological record of social and individual division of labor. From now on not everybody is
engaged in the same field of work as his and her comrade but there are individual specialists. While the gender-specific collective division of labor leads to
equality, the social division of labor involves inequality, the inequality of specialists.
Phase 2: "Gentle" Domination
Around 5,000 BCE cattle-nomads marked by Linear Pottery immigrate from the
East to Middle and Western Europe and there they encounter Epi-Paleolithic
gatherer-hunter communities. The invaders start to colonize Europe which
thence becomes Neolithic, and settle down as cattle-farmers. The social organization of cattle-breeders exhibits the first signs of the epochal change to a hierarchic society. This hierarchy, recognizable by the now appearing funerary inequality, the beginning of domination and lordship, is always connected with
patrifocality. At the top of these new pastoral tribes always stands a male; there
are no female chieftains out of their own power. A queen always presupposes a
king. (see addenda 10 a, 10 b, 10 c, p. 317- 324). 7
7 Translator`s note: The author has modified his opinion on this topic some years after writing
this passage. In January 2011 he published on his homepage an essay presenting his theory of
“The Social Organization of Cattle-Breeders”: http://www.gerhardbott.de/ii-neolithikum-unddanach/zur-sozialen-organisation-der-boviden-zuechter-catal-hoeyuek--bandkeramiker-staedtegruender-von-el-ubaid.html
In this essay (of more than 100 pages) he explains in great detail his theoretical view that the
LBK-cattle-farmers continued to live in a social organization marked by a matrilinear kinship

system and by matrilocality in their practise of exogamy. The author presents numerous There

are indications that cattle-farmers on their nomadic migrations with their herds and
flocks (cattle, bovids, and sheep/goats = “caprovids”) and with their farmers` seeds
and other goods which they transported on wheel-less land sledges drawn by cattle,
were led and controlled by proto-patriarchs. Working tool to drive cattle is the
scourge, which later we shall encounter as insignia of rule and reign, as in the hand
of the Pharao as his second symbol of power, the crook.
Since the women of the cattle-nomads had to abandon their domain, their own
agrarian production, because they had to abandon sedentariness, they had been
degraded to mere laborers for the male cattle breeders, e.g. as milkmaids. Therefore we can assume here the possible transition to the patrifocal pairing-family
structure with patrilocality of exogamy. By overmastering the bull and by castration, making him a draft-ox, the economic self-esteem of the males has considerably risen.
Since 8,000 BCE, that means for 3,000 years at the period we are considering right
now, the males are proud of their capacity of procreation (see chapter IX), and it is
the male`s fertility which he celebrates in the bull cult, identifying him-self with
the herd-bull who alone is able to fertilize a whole herd of cows. The belief that
male fertility is quantitatively by far superior to the reproductiveness of a woman is
presumably the historical root of the forthcoming patriarchal hubris.
Along with the increase of goods, of hierarchy, and of patriarchy, violence now
begins to leave its marks in history. During the first millennia in Catal Hüyük, e.g.
until 6,000 BCE, we do not find the slightest record of violence. Evidence from a
so-called "linear pottery mass grave" found in Talheim in Germany shows that the
cattle-breeders with linear pottery had smashed the skulls of 34 resisting humans
with their stone axes. In a similar belligerent and violent way the so-called
Cardinal-pottery populations invade Spain. It is now, after 5,000 BCE, that the
immigrated and resettled cattle breeders begin with the fortifica-tion of their new
settlements. For the first time, regular fight scenes with com-bating humans occur
in rock art, namely in the "arte levantino" in Spain. (see ad-denda 10 b and 10 c, p.
320 ff.).
Immigrants with their new bovid culture now appear in many regions: In Mesoarguments and indications for this theory, basing his arguments especially on the longhouse
culture and on the cults and rites according to the archeological record.

potamia the Ubaid culture, as well as in the Indus valley, in Egypt the Badari
culture, in the Sahara, then still fertile, “Semitic” Afro-Asians pasture their herds
since 6,000 BCE, as well as on the Arabic peninsula. In southeastern Europe
painted-pottery bovid breeders establish a stronghold of metallurgy, to mention
only some examples.
In this phase, the more or less peaceful overlaying of herdsmen, that is, cattle
breeders, over farmers takes place. The herdsmen use a yoke, (Sanskrit: Yoga),
for their ox-drawn sledges and a scourge (and dogs) for driving their herds, and
the pastoral leader and lord over his own cattle herds becomes the lord over the
farmer. That the herdsman claims the position of lordship and establishes it
over the subdued peasant is clearly evidenced in the third phase (see also chapter
X and note 10 a: Chalcolithic and Hierarchy, page 317 ff.). Phase 3: PloughPeasantry and Wheel
Soon after 4,000 BCE the cattle farmers made great inventions:
The wheel (perhaps developed from the potter´s wheel) allowed the land sledge
to be transformed to a cart or wagon and the plough replaces the draw hoe. Thus,
intensive cereal agriculture becomes possible.
The women, previously working with the draw-hoe, have to abandon the fields
and are restricted to housework: Differently from the draw-hoe, the plough is
drawn by oxen harnessed in a yoke. From now on, the male ploughs the fields.
Like the women in nomad-communities who during the time of migration had
lost their agriculture, the women in sedentary communities of cattle-farmers now
lose their public labor due to the plough.
The labor of the farmer-woman becomes domesticated and privatized, and she
becomes isolated as a farmer´s-wife in the pairing-family. This strengthens patrifocality and results in patriarchal social structures.
The progressing urbanization of the bovid cultures, combined with an increment
of the social division of labor, enables the bovid patriarchs, who control the
largest herds, to eventually institutionalize the hierarchy of a priest king, a reign
associated always with the bull cult and the Sacred Marriage Rite.
Note: It is not the priest, who becomes a prince. It is the “prince”, the ruler who,
in personal union, becomes priest. The Lordship of a sovereign is since its birth
affiliated with the Political Theology of the ruling class.
Not theology becomes politicized, but politics becomes theologized.
As we can learn from the Sumerian myths about “Emesh and Enten”, the Polit-

ical Theology of the priest-prince makes the following clear:
The Gods decreed the order that the herdsman rules over the farmer, and that
the farmer has to serve the herdsman, the pastoral man and master.
Still Kain and Abel demonstrate that God the Lord favored the animal-breeder
more than the farmer. The myth makes clear to everyone and especially to the
rural population: The herdsman (shepherd) is your lord. (see also chapter X).
In Pharaonic times it is not the working tools of the peasant but the ones of the
cattle-breeder and herdsman, which the Pharaoh holds as insignia of rule in his
hands: The crook of the historically older shepherd of sheep and goats, and the
scourge of the cattle-herdsman. There are Egyptologists who take this scourge
for a flail what is an error because in early Pharaonic times, when the insignia
originated, there existed no flail since the cereals had been threshed by the hoofs
of animals. The Pharaohs still stand in the tradition of the kingship of bovid culture, which historically commenced by the time we are considering, that is, soon
after 5,000 BCE at the earliest.
One should not ignore the fact that early and initial bovid kingship was exercised by the "gentle" herdsman, what is evident from the fact that women still
held considerable public power during Mode III. This can be seen in all early
bovid cultures: Next to the Minoan-Cretan culture, staying alive the longest
time until being conquered by the Greek Acheans and their Mycenae culture,
there are: The Ubaidian town-states Uruk, Ur, Nippur, Lagash etc., all the
ancient towns which later were conquered and subjugated by the Sumerians,
those militarized battle-cart warriors. Furthermore: The pre-Aryan Indus
cultures with their large citadel towns Harappa and Mohenjo-Daro, which were
defeated by the Aryan battle-cart warriors then taking over the reign in India. In
regions, however, where West-Asiatic nomadic cattle-herdsmen encounter darkskinned foreign peoples, the "gentle" patriarchal bovid kingship might become
really violent, as to be seen especially among the Caucasian Afro-Asians who,
coming as bovid pastoral herdsmen from the north, invade Northern Africa and
subdued the African natives.8
Mode IV: 4,000 BCE Domestication of Equids and Belligerent Overlays
The beginning of Mode IV overlaps the 3rd phase of Mode III. The innovation
8
Translator`s note: See the author’s essay on “Sacred Kingship in Africa (Erythräa)”,
Volume 2, p. 321 – 327).

of this mode consists in the domestication of equids, horses and donkeys, resulting in an unprecedented militarization. Here are two phases to differentiate, too:
Phase 1: Battle-Carts
After centuries of experiences with bovid breeding, cattle breeders succeed in
the much more difficult taming and training of equids, that is, north of the Caucasus the horse was the victim of domestication, first achieved by the Kurgan
peoples (Indo-Europeans), and south of the Caucasus it is a big donkey, the onager, domesticated by the Semitic populations of Southeastern Asia.
The domestication of the horse is achieved by harnessing the animals to the
vehicle, to the ox-cart, that is, the horses become tamed at the drawbar or yoke,
actually for driving, not for riding.
The social division of labor in the hierarchical towns leads to increasing specialization of handicraft: cart builders learn how to develop the old slow ox-cart,
good enough for cattle-farmers, into the faster battle-cart or chariot useful and
required for military purposes. The metallurgy, strongly forced by the Kurgan
peoples, and the production of bronze considerably contribute to the militarization of these equid pastoral tribes.
The mentioned "gentle" bovid cultures gradually become victim of the invasion
of equid battle-cart warriors. They are, contrary to the bovid pastoral populations, hard herdsmen who are going to institutionalize a merciless military patriarchal kingship. In the beginning they maintain the rites of bovid cultures such
as the Sacred Marriage, but more and more the males repress the feminine and
merry aspects of the rite.
Among these equid battle-cart-warriors are the Sumerians in Mesopotamia, the
Caucasian Pharaohs in Egypt, the Indo-European Hittites in Anatolia, the Semitic-Aryan Hyksos, the Aryans in India, and the Greek Achaeans in the Aegean.
All these imperial cultures of Mode IV are Bronze Age cultures, marking the beginning of the Iron Age.
Phase 2: Warriors on Horseback
Only after 2,000 BCE, that is about 2,000 years after the invention of a wheeled
vehicle and a steadily improved battle-cart construction leading to the fast chari-

ot, warriors riding on horseback and fighting from there competed with the previous battle-cart warriors. Only now, the horse had been bred, drilled and adjusted for horseback-riding.
For mounted warfare the invention of the stirrup was a precondition, and that
happened –according to disposable evidence– only at 1,800 BCE.
The new invasions of warriors on horseback, which started during the Bronze
and the Iron Age, sharpens the highly militarized patriarchal kingship showing
its unpleasant character.9
4. From this classification of the Neolithic into four Modes can be seen that the
social revolution, which replaces the Paleolithic culture in all its social and psychological aspects, is a result of the cultural changes of the Modes III and IV.
Let us consider these psycho-social changes: In the Paleolithic there had been
only a little or almost nothing to bequeath. The situation essentially changed
with Mode III. From there on there are not only precious resources, but also
profitable hierarchical positions to bequeath; and just these, as the during Mode
III emerging priest-kingship proves, is –according to the will of the royal parents, now established as economic agents– to remain within the closest kinship
circle of the pairing-family, founded by those.
Property will be left from father to son, and not into the hands of the consanguineal family with its joint ownership, be it inherited by the younger brother of
the bequeather or to his sister´s son, as commonly was the rule observed in consanguineal families during the times of Paleolithic avunculate.
Apart from the hierarchical positions it is, above all, the richness of the bovid
herds –abounding with heads, with "capites"– which as "capital" are to remain,
according to the father´s will, with his own children.
With the Paleolithic custom of the community’s joint ownership of the collectively appropriated goods, economic egoism could not come into the individuals
mind; peasants with their economy of self-sufficiency during the Modes I and II
remained relatively egalitarian. Economic egoism and greed for profit appear
only with the cattle-herds and their growth during Mode III and with the private
property of such wealth, which by far exceeded the range of the own needs.
Therefore the pastoral kingship and the cattle-breeder aristocracy have the
biggest interest in privatizing the joint ownership property and, for that reason,
9
Translator’s note: See the author’s comment on David Anthony’s “The Horse, the Wheel, and
Language” in volume 2, p. 214-255, and his remarks on this subject Vol. 2, p. 256-279).

in replacing the consanguineal family by the pairing-family. In order to establish
this new social order, the pairing-family (holder of the private property) becomes sanctified as wedlock and marriage by the ceremony of the Sacred Marriage Rite.
5. This epochal change from a consanguineal family organization to a pairingfamily organization was put into effect almost exclusively at the disadvantage of
the women, a result that is easily to explain: “The shepherd (herdsman) is the
Lord.” I have reasoned above (chapter VII, 9.2.) how the institutional change
from matrilocality to patrilocality is associated with Mode III.
According to the new rule of patrilocality enforced by the cattle-breeders, the
women have to leave the shelter and bosom of their birth family and have, as
strangers, to adapt to the relatives of their spouse who isolates "his" wife within
the nuclear pairing-family dominated by him.
Henceforth a daughter has to bear her children not any more into her mother`s
hands, but into the hands of her mother-in-law, and, by her new paternal family,
her worth is judged only by her biological potential for reproduction. She barely
participates in the economic value creation; her duty consists in running the
housework and in re-production. By domestication and privatization of her previously public and collective labor, which had persisted from the Paleolithic into
Mode II and the beginning of Mode III, she loses her economic importance and
her social status. In Mode IV begins the social infantilization of the woman.
For the son, by contrast, the transition from the matrilinear consanguineal family
to the patrilinear and patrilocal pairing-family is rather pleasurable. During the
Paleolithic the "mother´s sons" left immediately after their sexual maturity the
consanguineal family of their mothers and became socialized by the motherbrother, who lived in a different consanguineal family, which was not his one.
Their mother`s brother, the avunculus, initiated them into the hunting collective
of his co-operative. Just after their sexual maturity the young males became
hardened in a highly masculinized hunters’ collective, presumably already infected by "compensatory masculinity", in order to be able to cooperate in their
bloody butcher´s business, surely exposed to a strong pressure of social selection. Thus a complete change for the male:
Now, in the Neolithic, the son, remaining in or in the environment of the pairingfamily of his parents, his birth family, lives secure in the bosom of his patrilinear

blood-relatives who protect him against his wife – he gets a good deal. True is
that he has to obey his father instead of his avunculus, but he obtains the prospect of becoming later himself head of a pairing-family, like his father. However the father can punish him by withdrawal of the heritage and thus force him
to obedience, what was not possible for the avunculus because of his "poorness".
6. The process of privatization of the previous joint ownership of the community
gradually proceeds, too. In the beginning, only a part of the co-operative’s resources can be privatized. This can be concluded, for example, by taking into account the Sumerian temple economy of early dynastic times around 3,000 BCE.
Originally, private property is restricted to the house garden and the few house
animals. Land, however, still remains, even in early Sumerian times, property of
public joint ownership administrated by the temple hierarchy, at that time still
under the control of noble women. The collectively produced agricultural goods
were delivered to the temple, which carried out the distribution, combined with a
precise accounting after the invention of writing around 3,200 BCE.
It may well be that the cattle herds, originally domesticated by collective male
work, by the male cooperative, continued to be part of the joint property, similar
as it is the case among some reindeer-nomads until our days. However, the typical practice of pasturing and migration and the permanent sedentariness of the
bovid shepherds made it easier for the males to divide the herds between them
and, as well, to husband some cows as domestic animals, thus allowing
privatization of the common ownership. It results in historical misjudgments if
one fails to recognize and understand the socio-historical importance of the
fundamental differences between the archaic horticulture of Mode II with a few
heads of sheep or goats as domestic animals on the one hand, and, on the other
hand, the cattle-farmers and herdsmen with their numerous herds, their pairingfamilies and their tribal hierarchy, the prelude of later kingship during Modes III
and IV. Otherwise, the historic origin of patriarchy and its socio-economic preconditions remains misunderstood.
7. Disappointingly, even the renowned and knowledgeable historian Gerda
LERNER (1986: "The Creation of Patriarchy") who accurately analyzes and
critically deals with the advancement of patriarchal social structures during the
dynastic Bronze Age, especially the Sumerians, lacks the indispensable socioand universal-historic far-sightedness and depth of focus: She does not detect the
earlier Neolithic roots of patriarchy because she has not understood the differ-

ence between Mode II and III. She does not distinguish the fundamental difference between the domestication of domestic animals (sheep and goats) by the female working-collective in Mode II and the later domestication of herd animals,
cattle, by the males in Mode III. The consequence is her erroneous argument that
there could not be a causal connection between animal-domestication and the
development to patriarchy because there had been animal-breeding also in prepatriarchal societies. (loc. Cit. 46). This overall assertion is incorrect. Correct is
merely that patriarchy has no connection with the "animal-breeding" of Mode II,
but there is a causal context between the cattle- breeding of Mode III and the institutionalization of patriarchy. Disappointing is, as well, that Lerner (loc. cit. p.
126) uncritically approves the historically wrong statement of Sumerologist
Samuel Noah Kramer, that the Sacred Marriage had been celebrated for the first
time by the Sumerian kings. This is an erroneous opinion, as I shall explain in
chapter X, dealing there also with Kramer in more detail. Lerner and Kramer
have an insufficient knowledge of the Neolithic history as a whole; since the excavations in Catal Hüyük bear witness of the transition to the Sacred Marriage
Rite already about 7,000 BCE, and not only about 3,200 BCE in Sumerian
times.
Apart from these insufficiencies, Lerner´s book is extremely worth reading and
should be acknowledged in any case.
8. During Mode III the state, eventually, becomes a historical fact initially always as a town-state. In many textbooks, affected by a "historical idealism", the
opinion is published that the state and state-authority and -government, as recorded in Mesopotamia and Egypt, had developed organically, meaning "bottom
up", among the people, actually as a consequence of the "irrigation economy".
Because irrigation had to be organized in a more and more complex method, this
basic necessity had automatically and organically generated the state.
Well, such a „scientific“ belief is, in fact, a "naive evolutionism".
We are facing here a typical hysteron proteron: Namely, cause and effect have
been confused; in fact they are reverse: The cause is the political institution of a
state and state-government by the lords, who came „from heaven“, and the effect
is the planned and controlled organization of the irrigation economy by the new
effective government.
This fact has been analysed and convincingly been proved already by Alexander
RÜSTOW (1950: "Ursprung der Herrschaft" (The Origin of Domination, Vol. 1

"Ortsbestimmung der Gegenwart, p. 306):
Only after the institutionalization of state-dominance, based on real power with
the capacity to take the command and with the purpose to intensify the agricultural economy, the construction of complex irrigation systems was executed "top
down", by command, mostly by compulsory labor. Often it is bashfully concealed that Pharao MENES / NARMER, adored by all enthusiasts of imperialism, was a king who united Upper and Lower Egypt to one empire under his
double-crown, indeed with brutal violence: His military superiority allowed him,
before 3,000 BCE, to publicly decapitate the other priest-princes of those Egyptian town-states who had resisted Narmer’s imperial ambitions. On his famous
cosmetic palette he had, as a sign of his divine power, ten of these priestprincely town-kings depicted lying on the floor with their heads between their
legs. A proof of how "organically" state-rulership developed?
To deny or whitewash this obvious fact provokes the question: Has science be
contaminated by esotericism? A "swing to the right" in the cultural sciences is
presently demonstrated by concealing that our cultures had no peaceful origin
but a birth-defect: VIOLENCE is the father of political power and the state. The
German word „Staatsgewalt“ for state-authority still gives credit to that genesis.
9. Some additional political remarks on the inauguration of hierarchy during
Mode III of the Neolithic and on the origin of domination: An “advanced culture“ („Hochkultur“) defined in the sense of having achieved the art of writing,
is not possible without a progressing social division of labor. The specialization
of the social work, the inequality of specialists and the implication of a division
between servants/slaves and masters/Lords, is the congenital defect of every
stratified society but also their conditio sine qua non. With the enforcement of
hierarchy and chiefs the driving forces of the individual increase relatively to
the collective ones.
The price for this individualization of a few, including their consciousness, is the
domestication of the subjugated lower strata as „flock“ or "herd " whose Lord is,
at the same time, their shepherd (see Psalm 23).
The upper strata of the pastoral lords, not only commanding the military power
but authorising the Political Theology as well, organize and lead the growing
herd of working creatures, who more or less voluntarily surrender to the heteronomy dictated by the pastoral leader.
Let us take notice that the modest shepherd´s crook has been preserved until our

days as a (prince)priestly symbol of authority and dominance. The scourge of
the pastoral bovid herdsman however, is nowadays nowhere to be seen; it has
been replaced by the scourge of money.
We are facing here an antinomy associated with the so-called "process of
civilization", a process which at the same time always has been and still is a
"process of militarization". This antinomy results in the „discomfort in the culture“ (Unbehagen in der Kultur) taken as discontent with civilization.
During the Iron Age, despite or because of the aggravation of inequality and
bondage which are a consequence of the pastoral equid patriarchy, eventually
and for the first time the breakthrough to the individual´s „Geistesfreiheit“, the
freedom of mind, occurs in the public sphere, a liberty of thought and speech
claimed and realized by some freethinking individuals. The breakthrough: Enlightenment instead of political theology and the connected religion of salvation.
The freethinkers know that they owe their economic existence to hierarchy and
the stratified society they live in but nonetheless make it an object of intellectual
criticism.
I think this contradiction, this antinomy, may only find a solution with a constant growth of individual and social consciousness in a future society.
10. I summarize: The Neolithic revolution brought about a radical change and
re-evaluation of the Paleolithic culture of homo sapiens after a duration of almost 200.000 years.
As well as the gradual achievements of the Paleolithic tool-culture which are scientifically distinguished in 4 modes, now in the Neolithic the achievements of the
economic mode of farming and animal husbandry, including the associated change
of consciousness, spread over the globe, either by diffusion or by colon-ization. Of
course, with this cultural revolution the revolution of social organiza-tion is
associated: the pairing family, paternalism with patrilinearity and patri-focality, and
the prince-priestly patriarchal kingship become almost generally in-stitutionalized
synchronically with that economic change. Even marginalized ethnic groups which
resist the process of Neolithization up to the modern era do not remain unaffected
by the radiation of these cultural and social innovations.
With the taurine phallic fertility-god the Neolithic males start to put a claim
against the cooperative-matrilinear consanguineal family and against the Great
Mother adored by the Paleolithic people.
The social changes create a divine pantheon, which still owes its existence to the

one Great Mother, this later "Mother of all Gods", until the father makes
himself the head of the pairing family, then of the „gens“, then of the tribe, and
ultimately of all social organizations.
This seizure of reign and lordship on Earth allows the patriarch the seizure of the
lordship in the pantheon.
The male who upgraded himself from a fertility-god to the dominant father-god
becomes pantheon-chief, while the ancient "Mother of all Gods" will be mythographically downgraded to a "daughter of the father-god".
This reassessment, the new father-god´s usurpation of the archaic mountainseat, as well as of the "throne" of the Neolithic "Mother of all Gods", successor
of the Paleolithic „Great Mother", is described in my study „The Sacred
Marriage in Anatolia, Mesopotomia and Ancient Egypt“, also available on this
academia.edu-site.
